---
layout: post
title: Phew
date: '2006-08-17T18:45:00.000-07:00'
author: Julian Hyde
tags:
modified_time: '2006-08-17T19:12:53.530-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5672165237896126100.post-6951980508446361923
blogger_orig_url: https://julianhyde.blogspot.com/2006/08/phew.html
---

Phew. Got that difficult first post out of the way. Aren't they always
the worst?

It was just like when I was a lad, starting a new diary. Every year or
two, someone would buy me a diary for Christmas. The first entry, on
January 1st, was always magnificent. For one thing, I'd had a week to
think about what I was going to put in it. And this was to be the
first entry of a glorious chronicle, the story of my life from this
day forward.

By the second week of January, the Christmas tree and decorations had
been taken down, the diary's newness was getting a bit old, and the
entries were petering out.

The problem was that diaries of that time just weren't designed for my
sporadic diaristic style. Had a vendor of the time invented one, and
had gotten it into the hands of my gift-giving relatives, it would
have had page headings something like this:

* Friday, 1st January, 1982
* Saturday, 2nd January, 1982
* Sunday, 3rd January, 1982
* Saturday, 1st January, 1983
* Sunday, 2nd January, 1983
* Sunday, 1st January, 1984

As it happens, I do remember what I was doing on 1st January 1984,
without the aid of a browning, mostly empty diary. I was frantically
trying to read the book by George Orwell, before the titular year
started in earnest, just in case it turned out to be true.

I remember it was a good read. Scary, suspenseful, preposterously and
utterly unlike anything that was going on in the real 1984, but Orwell
had a canny grasp of the laws of political physics. Since I still
remember it, it just goes to show: if you're doing something
worthwhile, you don't need to put it into your diary. You'll remember
it.
