---
layout: post
title: Mondrian 2.2, Cube Designer, and CurrentDateMember
date: '2006-10-15T23:12:00.000-07:00'
author: Julian Hyde
tags: 
modified_time: '2006-10-16T00:32:12.913-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5672165237896126100.post-6211598162303899041
blogger_orig_url: https://julianhyde.blogspot.com/2006/10/mondrian-22-cube-designer-and.html
---

I made the first release candidate of mondrian-2.2 a few days ago.<br /><br />The most exciting feature is Pentaho's brand new <a href="http://sourceforge.net/project/shownotes.php?group_id=35302&release_id=454703">Cube Designer</a>:<br /><blockquote><i>The Pentaho Cube Designer simplifies and expedites the analysis process by eliminating the need for administrators to use XML to create new OLAP schemas. Instead, Cube Designer’s wizard-driven graphical user interface walks administrators through the steps of connecting to relational data sources, defining analytical dimensions, identifying measures for analysis, and publishing the schema to the Pentaho server.</i></blockquote>At last, a serious UI for building Mondrian schemas! I've been helping the Pentaho folks develop this for the last few months, and was delighted when they decided to release it open-source.<br /><br />It's been almost four months since Mondrian release 2.1. There are no earth-shatteringly huge new features in the core Mondrian 2.2, because I've been busy with the Cube Designer and <a href="http://www.olap4j.org">olap4j</a>. But if you peruse the <a href="http://sourceforge.net/project/shownotes.php?release_id=454606&amp;group_id=35302">change log</a>, you'll see there have been lots of development activity, resulting in numerous fixes in areas such as performance and native SQL generation.<br /><br />A useful addition is <span style="font-weight: bold; font-style: italic;">a set of functions for accessing the current date</span>, contributed by Zelaine Fong and Benny Chow. If MDX had a date datatype, we would have implemented these functions long ago. But MDX doesn't have a date datatype, because everyone who uses dates wants to access them as a dimension (say, [Time].[2006].[October].[15]), not scalar values. To make things worse, we noticed that everyone's Time dimension is structured differently: some have quarters while some don't; some use month names while others use month numbers; and some time dimensions are structured on weeks rather than months.<br /><br />So, Benny and Zelaine created a function which formats the current date as a string, then looks up a member of the time dimension. For example,<br /><pre>SELECT<br />{ [Measures].[Unit Sales] } ON COLUMNS,<br />{ CurrentDateMember(<br />     [Time],<br />     '[\"Time\"]\\.[yyyy]\\.[\"Q\"q]\\.[m]\\.[d]')<br />  .Lag(3) :<br />  CurrentDateMember(<br />     [Time],<br />     '[\"Time\"]\\.[yyyy]\\.[\"Q\"q]\\.[m]\\.[d]')<br />} ON ROWS<br />FROM [Sales]<br /></pre>prints the sales total for today and the previous three days.<br /><br />The trick is with the format string,<span style="font-family:monospace;"> </span><span style="font-size:85%;"><span style="font-family:courier new;">'[\"Time\"]\\.[yyyy]\\.[\"Q\"q]\\.[m]\\.[d]'</span></span>. This is substituted with the current date, to give <span style="font-size:85%;"><span style="font-family:courier new;">[Time].[2006].[Q4].[10].[15]</span></span>. Then Mondrian looks in the [Time] dimension to find a member with that unique name.<br /><br />The quotes around "Time" and the backslashes before the dots (\\.) are needed to prevent the formatting facility from replacing things that it shouldn't. It makes the code a little difficult to read, but it allowed us to use <a href="http://mondrian.sourceforge.net/api/mondrian/util/Format.html">the existing formatting facility</a>, which is well-tested and well-documented, rather than inventing a new one just for this function.<br /><br />Now suppose that the granularity of the time dimension is less than daily. In a monthly time dimension, should 15th October fall resolve to [2006].[10] or [2006].[11]? The BEFORE , AFTER and EXACT keywords help Mondrian decide. So,<br /><pre>      CurrentDateMember(<br />     [Time],<br />     '[\"Time\"]\\.[yyyy]\\.[\"Q\"q]\\.[m]',<br />     BEFORE)</pre>would evaluate to the greatest member which is less than the current date, namely, <span style="font-size:85%;"><span style="font-family:courier new;">[Time].[2006].[10]</span></span>.<br /><br />This function fits well with another feature in mondrian-2.2, which I intend to blog about in a few days, is the <span style="font-weight: bold;">extension of Parameters to system, schema, and session scope</span>. Parameters are now much, much more than bind variables, and are a great way of sharing constants and expressions across your whole application.<br /><br />So, while you're waiting for that blog entry... go and download the new mondrian release candidate, and try it out. Hopefully, the full release will be out this week or next.