---
layout: post
title: 'A what-if scenario: musing about adding writeback capability to Mondrian'
date: '2009-04-05T15:50:00.000-07:00'
author: Julian Hyde
tags:
- mondrian olap writeback splash olap4j palo jpalo
modified_time: '2009-04-05T16:06:48.795-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5672165237896126100.post-903810947836140325
blogger_orig_url: https://julianhyde.blogspot.com/2009/04/what-if-scenario-musing-about-adding.html
---

<div>The <a href="http://www.pentaho.com/summit09/">Pentaho Partner Summit</a> last week was a great chance to meet people who are using — and being successful — with Mondrian.<br /></div><div><br /></div><div>As always, people are thinking of using it in ways that I hadn't imagined. A couple of comments got me thinking about adding writeback support, something we'd long talked about, but seriously considered implementing.</div><div><br /></div><div>Writeback allows the OLAP end-user to modify cell values and see the effects ripple through their spreadsheet. As you can imagine, it is useful for doing what-if analysis, especially budgeting.</div><div><br /></div><div>If the cell is a sum of finer-grained cells, we need to modify those finer-grained cells also, and all of the totals of other dimensionalities created from those finer-grained cells, otherwise things just don't add up. This is hard to implement, because you sometimes need to modify a lot of cells, and even harder for ROLAP engines like Mondrian, because such engines don't store cells, they read directly from the unaggregated fact table.</div><div><br /></div><div>First, I went looking for existing APIs for writeback.</div><div><br /></div><div>Microsoft offers support for writeback via the <a href="http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms145568.aspx">UPDATE CUBE</a> MDX statement. As always with Microsoft's MDX support, it's difficult to tell whether this is 'standard MDX', but the command seems to be well thought-out. The fact that it is an MDX command rather than an API call allows them to use an MDX expression as the rule by which to pro-rate changes to child cells.</div><div><br /></div><div>I also looked at the <a href="http://www.jpalo.com/en/products/palo_java_api.html">JPalo Java API</a>. (I've always wanted to work more closely with <a href="http://www.palo.net/">Palo</a>. Although they're an OLAP engine, they have a different architecture (C and MOLAP) and core target audience (Excel users), and they're open source, so I see a lot of benefit to them and us if we pool resources. I invited them to join the <a href="http://www.olap4j.org/">olap4j</a> process early on, but they preferred to define their own Palo-specific Java API. I'm still hopeful.)</div><div><br /></div><div>I <a href="http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=209776">downloaded their most recent release from SourceForge</a> and found that it was a release out of date (2.0 versus 2.5) and didn't contain the source code. There is a more up-to-date version in <a href="http://jpalo.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/jpalo/trunk/">subversion</a>. In DbConnection I found the setDataNumericSplashed method:</div><div><br /></div><div></div><blockquote><div> /**</div><div>  * Sets the given <code>double</code> value at the specified cell.</div><div>  * The splashMode paramater is only important for consolidated cells and</div><div>  * determines how the value is scattered among the consolidated elements.</div><div>  * Please use the defined class constants for valid values. Although more</div><div>  * modes are currently defined only three are supported, namely:</div><div>  * SPLASH_MODE_DEFAULT, SPLASH_MODE_BASE_SET and SPLASH_MODE_BASE_ADD</div><div>  * @param cube {@link CubeInfo} representation</div><div>  * @param coordinates {@link ElementInfo} representations which specify the</div><div>  * coordinates</div><div>  * @param value the new value</div><div>  * @param splashMode the splash mode, use defined class constants</div><div>  */</div><div> public void setDataNumericSplashed(CubeInfo cube, ElementInfo[] coordinate, double value, int splashMode);</div><div></div></blockquote><div>I couldn't find any more documentation than that, but 'splash mode' seems to be equivalent to Microsoft's update strategies USE_EQUAL_ALLOCATION etc.<br /></div><div><br /></div><div>There are several remaining questions. What are the right changes to the olap4j API to support writeback? Support for the UPDATE CUBE statement is the leading contender. I'd love to hear what the olap4j community — especially the folks building the <a href="http://wiki.pentaho.com/display/COM/Pentaho+Analysis+Tool">Pentaho Analysis Tool</a> — think of this API, and how they would expose writeback in their UI.</div><div><br /></div><div>I presume we'll need a scheme for transaction management. End-users will want to save their work, come back another day and continue where they left off. Several end-users might be using Mondrian at the same time, and want to see their numbers, not anyone else's. So, I think we'll need to introduce a concept I'd call a 'scenario', which is a property of a connection and can be persisted.</div><div><br /></div><div>We'll need to figure out how to implement writeback within a Mondrian's ROLAP-with-caching architecture. Writing to the fact table is not tenable, because the modified cells can be of a multitude of dimensionalities. Neither is writing to an aggregate table, for the same reason. Ideal would be to write to disk a minimal description of the cells the user has modified — in XML, say — and do the other magic in the caching layer.</div><div><br /></div><div>Lastly, I just need to find time to implement it.</div><div><br /></div>