---
layout: post
title: Improved collections classes for Mondrian's query execution process
date: '2010-02-16T18:24:00.000-08:00'
author: Julian Hyde
tags: 
modified_time: '2010-02-16T18:34:09.387-08:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5672165237896126100.post-5056075833326780784
blogger_orig_url: https://julianhyde.blogspot.com/2010/02/improved-collections-classes-for.html
---

Mondrian calculations work predominantly over lists of members and tuples. Internally, Mondrian represents lists of members as List<member>, and represents lists of tuples as List<member[]>. (And similarly for iterators over members and tuples.)<br /><br />There are two problems with this. First, the representation of tuple lists requires an array to be allocated for each element of the list. Allocations cost time and memory. (Granted, we could allocate temporary arrays only when tuples are accessed, which would cost only time. But according to my latest round of profiling, the effort of allocating lots small arrays is significant.)<br /><br />Second, the code to deal with members and tuples has to be different. The most extreme example of this found in the implementation of CrossJoin. There are over 30 inner classes in CrossJoinFunDef.java, to deal with the permutations of iterator vs. list, mutable vs. immutable, and tuple vs. member.<br /><br />In short, the java standard List and Iterator classes are not serving us well. I think it's appropriate to introduce classes/interfaces that handle members and tuples more uniformly, and can store, access, and iterate over collections without lots of small arrays being created.<br /><br />Here are some collection classes that I think would serve the purpose:<br /><blockquote>interface TupleList {<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;int size();<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;int arity();<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Member getMember(int index, int ordinal);<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;TupleIterator tupleIterator();<br />}<br /><br />interface TupleIterator {<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;int arity();<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;boolean hasNext();<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;// writes the members of the next tuple into given array<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;void next(Member[] members);<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;// appends members of the next tuple to given list<br />&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;void next(List&lt;Member&gt; members);<br />}</blockquote>If arity = 1 (i.e. if the list is just a collection of members) then TupleList could easily be implemented using java.util.ArrayList.<br /><br />For other arities, a list of tuples could be represented as a set of members end-to-end. For instance, the list with two 3-tuple elements {(A1, B1, C1), (A2, B2, C2)} would be held in a list {A1, B1, C1, A2, B2, C2} and getMember(index, ordinal) would read element index * arity + ordinal of the list.<br /><br />Introducing these would require quite a few code changes, mostly in the mondrian.olap.fun package, which is where the builtin functions are implemented. There should be no changes to the user API or olap4j.<br /><br />I am still debating whether this change makes sense. Usually this kind of penny-pinching architectural change doesn't pay off. But some of them pay off big. I've learned in Oracle, Broadbase, and SQLstream that for high-performance data processing you shouldn't be doing any memory allocations in an inner loop that is executed once per row. That isn't quite practical in Java, but it's a goal to strive for. In today's CPU architectures, where memory is slow and last-level-cache is fast, it pays to keep data contiguous.<br /><br />If you are a Mondrian developer, I'd be interested to hear what you think about this proposed change.</member[]></member>