---
layout: post
title: SQL past and future
date: '2010-06-29T18:08:00.000-07:00'
author: Julian Hyde
tags:
- sql oracle db2 nosql "one size fits all"
modified_time: '2010-06-29T18:08:52.794-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5672165237896126100.post-4814397995264524607
blogger_orig_url: https://julianhyde.blogspot.com/2010/06/sql-past-and-future.html
---

Ken North, writing in Dr. Dobb's Journal, gives a <a href="http://www.drdobbs.com/blog/archives/2010/06/database_indust.html">nice overview of the long and storied history of SQL</a>. The piece helps one understand the wave of mergers among the big database vendors, and make sense of current trends in database and database-like software. And I'd like to offer my opinion about where SQL and database management systems are headed.<br /><br /><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;">North looks into the claims that 'the database is dead' and finds that — yet again — reports of its death were greatly exaggerated:</div><blockquote><i>Forrester Research recently estimated the total database market (licenses, support, consulting) would grow from $27 billion in 2009 to $32 billion by 2012. SQL technology is entrenched in many organizations and across millions of web sites. Perhaps that explains why, during the past decade, IBM, Oracle, Sun and SAP made billion-dollar investments in a ‘dead’ technology.</i></blockquote>However, I do believe that the relational database is currently in crisis. Relational databases have been the mainstay of data management for over twenty years, but Oracle and its cohorts have no answer for "<a href="http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=1563874">Big Data</a>", the massive onslaught of information from the web and sensors.<br /><br />The <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL">NoSQL movement</a> is solving these problems by challenging some of the assumptions held by RDBMS vendors. At SQLstream, we regard ourselves as part of the NoSQL movement even though we are huge fans of SQL, because we are challenging the biggest assumption of them all: that you have to put data on disk before you can analyze it.<br /><br /><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;">It's a shame that North doesn't mention streaming SQL, because it fits perfectly into the grand arc of the SQL language: adopt new problems, express them declaratively, and solve them first with special-purpose database engines and finally by adapting the architecture of the big, general-purpose database engines. This last step sometimes takes many years to happen, but it happened for transaction processing, object database, and data warehousing, and I have no doubt that it will happen for streaming relational data.</div><br /><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;">One of the reasons that SQL has remained relevant is SQL standards process; products built on one database can be run on another database and, perhaps more important, skill sets acquired on one engine can be applied to another. When the dust settles, and the big databases have learned hard architectural lessons, I think a lot of these new problems will be solved in SQL.&nbsp;</div><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;"><br /></div><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;">Unlike <a href="http://www.cs.brown.edu/~ugur/fits_all.pdf">Mike Stonebraker</a>, I do think that organizations will want to put all these different forms of data into one database management system. That database will of course be a facade spread over many servers, disks, data organizations and query processing engines, but will offer centralized management and allow the different forms of data to be combined. They will get their wish because the SQL language is so powerful at hiding differences in underlying data organization.</div><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;"><br /></div><div style="margin-bottom: 0px; margin-left: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-top: 0px;">When the dust has settled, the SQL language will have changed and adapted yet again, and maybe there will be some new names at the top of the roster of database vendors, but we will once again be solving most of our data management problems using declarative queries beginning with the word "SELECT".&nbsp;SQL is dead; long live SQL!</div>