---
layout: post
title:  "Morel DML"
date:   2025-03-31 12:00:00 -0800
author: Julian Hyde
tweet:  https://x.com/julianhyde/status/1896834583947313535
---

Morel's `from` expression is a powerful alternative to SQL's `SELECT`,
but Morel currently has no alternative to SQL's `INSERT`, `UPDATE`,
`DELETE` and `MERGE`. Any data engineering tool needs to support
[DML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_manipulation_language), but
how should Morel do it?

In this post, I sketch out my initial thoughts about DML. I would love
to hear feedback from people who have used existing data engineering,
ELT and ETL tools. It's at an early stage, so there is plenty of time
to change course.

# Translate SQL DML commands to Morel

The obvious thing would be to directly translate SQL's DML commands
into Morel. If we did that, the SQL script

{% highlight sql %}
# Delete employees who earn more than 1,000.
DELETE FROM scott.emps
WHERE sal > 1000;

# Add one employee.
INSERT INTO scott.emps (empno, deptno, ename, job, sal)
VALUES (100, 20, 'HYDE', 'ANALYST', 1150);

# Double the salary of all managers.
UPDATE scott.emps
SET sal = sal * 2
WHERE job = 'MANAGER';

# Commit
COMMIT;
{% endhighlight %}

would become the Morel code

{% highlight sml %}
(* Delete employees who earn more than 1,000. *)
delete e in scott.emps
  where e.sal > 1000;

(* Add one employee. *)
insert scott.emps
  [{empno = 100, deptno = 20, ename = "HYDE", job = "ANALYST", sal = 1150}];

(* Double the salary of all managers. *)
update e in scott.emps
  where e.job = 'MANAGER'
  assign (e, {e with sal = e.sal * 2};
{% endhighlight %}

(The code uses new operators `insert`, `update`, and `delete`, adds an
`assign` clause for `update` that updates selected fields, and uses `with`
[functional update syntax borrowed from OCaml](https://ocaml.org/manual/5.3/coreexamples.html#s:tut-recvariants).)

But I think we would be missing an opportunity to match the challenges
of DML with Morel's strengths as a functional language.

# DML as functional programming

Functional programming languages really don't like assignment: they
would rather create a new variable than mutate an existing variable.

This makes sense for a functional language's compiler -- if a program
has no mutations, the compiler has more freedom to re-order and
parallelize the program -- but the controller running data engineering
script would also like to re-order and parallelize wherever possible.

To the uninitiated, the semantics of SQL's DML commands are
weird. When modifying the `emps` table, you can read from the you can
to the `emps` table, but it is the before image -- the state of the
`emps` table before this command started inserting, modifying or
deleting rows.

It is reasonable, and useful, to refer to the before image, but it is
only the before image of the current command. Suppose your script has
three commands -- a `DELETE`, an `INSERT` and an `UPDATE`, as in the
previous example -- and the `UPDATE` command wishes to reference the
state of the `emps` table before the `INSERT` command was run. In SQL,
you're out of luck. In the DML syntax I'm proposing for Morel, it is
straightforward:

{% highlight sml %}
(* Delete employees who earn more than 1,000. *)
val emps2 =
  from e in scott.emps
    where not (e.sal > 1000);

(* Add one employee. *)
val emps3 = emps2 union
  [{empno = 100, deptno = 20, ename = "HYDE", job = "ANALYST", sal = 1150}];

(* Double the salary of all managers. *)
val emps4 =
  from e in emps3
    yield if e.job = "MANAGER" then {e with sal = e.sal * 2} else e;

(* Commit. *)
commit {scott with emps = emps4};
{% endhighlight %}

Because we use a new variable for each version of the `emps` table,
the previous versions are still available.

# Incremental computation

Incremental computation is essential when you are maintaining large
data sets on disk. If you have a table with a billion rows and you
want to insert, update or delete 1% of those rows, it makes no sense
to write the 99% of rows that are not effected.

The SQL `INSERT`, `UPDATE` and `DELETE` commands are clearly designed
with that in mind.

But modifying 1% of a collection is mutation, and antithetical to the
functional programming ethos. It is more complicated so say 'here are
the rows added, modified and removed' than to say 'here is the new
relation'.

Our proposal offers the best of both. A Morel modification command
returns the new set but is implemented by sending incremental commands
to the database. For example, if the "Delete employees who earn more
than 1,000" command above deletes 1% of employees, then `emps2` will
contain the remaining 99% of employees, but Morel will update the
database efficiently by sending a `DELETE` command.

Incremental computation also arises during incremental view
maintenance (IVM), or more generally, when maintaining some
materialized data set that has been created (explicitly by the user,
or implicitly by Morel's planner) earlier this script run or in a
previous run. It is notoriously hard to correctly write the
incremental logic; it is preferable to declare that the data set is
always equivalent to running a particular query, and have the planner
compute the deltas.

For both kinds of incremental computation, we believe that people
should work in the 'declarative space', saying 'this is the relation
that I want', and Morel should figure out the incremental operations
to compute and store that relation efficiently.

# Requirements for a data engineering language

Things a data engineering language needs to do well:

* Static typing, so that you can find and refactor all uses of a
  particular table or field across all scripts.
* Refer to previous versions of any table.
* Commit atomically when you are ready, and not be forced to commit
  before you are ready.
* Materialize intermediate data sets (temporary tables).
* Give the compiler freedom to re-order commands, parallelize
  commands, and create (or suggest) temporary tables.
* Refer to previous types of a table (e.g. when the table did not have
  a `bonus` column, and when the `hiredate` column was a string)

# Conclusion

I have presented a sketch of how DML commands could be implemented in
Morel, in a way is consistent with Morel's ethos and makes some of
data engineering's challenges more tractible.

These are early thoughts, and I would love to hear anything I've
missed or could have done better.

If you have comments, please reply on
[BlueSky @julianhyde.bsky.social](https://bsky.app/profile/julianhyde.bsky.social)
or Twitter:

<div data_dnt="true">
{% twitter page.tweet limit=5 hide_media=true %}
</div>

<!--
This article
[has been updated](https://github.com/julianhyde/share/commits/main/blog/_posts/2025-03-31-morel-dml.md).
-->
